# Linux or any OS booting

#### Booting

- Flow looks like BIOS -> Grub stage1 -> Grub stage2 -> OS loading
- BIOS POST
- Boot loaders are divided into two stages - GRUB 
- GRUB will using area below 1MB so OS code need to be loaded above `0x00100000` memory location.
- What linker does it to tell code where itself to get loaded? Something which it does for ordinary programs where linker will add things related vdso and other stuff.



#### Setting up Stack

Needing a Stack is the basic requirement to execute any C code.

- Stack size has to be defined.

- Program space has to be initialized with `.bss` portion of the area. (Block Started by Symbols). BSS segment length is defined but no data has been stored. BSS segment gets used to store  statically-allocated variables that are declared but have not been assigned a value yet. In linux this section is initialized to 0. 

  ```assembly
    KERNEL_STACK_SIZE equ 4096                  ; size of stack in bytes
  
      section .bss
      align 4                                     ; align at 4 bytes
      kernel_stack:                               ; label points to beginning of memory
          resb KERNEL_STACK_SIZE                  ; reserve stack for the kernel
  ```

  

- Stack is pointed by `esp` register value. 

  ```assembly
      mov esp, kernel_stack + KERNEL_STACK_SIZE   ; point esp to the start of the
                                                  ; stack (end of memory area)
  ```

- At this stage loader should be able to call C code and execute it. Which will be our kernel.



#### IO

- Framebuffer - screen divided in to 80 cols and 25 rows. Framebuffer start with memory address `0x000B8000`. This memory is divided in 16bit cells to represent each pixel with char, fg and bg. Writing specific values will display things on the screen.
- Cursor position is pointed by serial representation of above pixels. It does IO mapped IO.
- Serial port IO 
  - Configuration of this involves 
    - The speed used for sending data (bit or baud rate) - This is frequency at which serial port runs in HZ for example 115200. Setting up speed means setting up divisor. 
    - If any error checking should be used for the data (parity bit, stop bits)
    - The number of bits that represent a unit of data (data bits)
- Setup serial communication buffers
- Set Ready To Transmit (RTS) and Data Terminal Ready (DTR) pins and start writing data on the serial port.



#### Segmentation 

- First create GDT (used by kernel) then IDT for interrupt handling.
- LDT is required for userspace programs.
- 64 bit architecture does not require task segments strucutre above though it still exists during booting of the kernel.



#### Interrupts 

Divided into 3 sections according to Intel.

- Exceptions - interrupts generated by CPU, when the CPU detects error, for example division by zero or accessing a memory page which is not in RAM. `0-31` are assigned for this exception handling.
- Hardware interrupts - when a hardware event happens, for example button is pressed on a keyboard. These are managed by PIC (Programmable Interrupt Controller) 
- Software interrupts - when a software signals CPU that it needs kernel attention. These interrupts are generally used for system calls like signals in OS.



How interrupt get handled ?

- CPU pushes interrupt related information onto the stack.
- then look up the interrupt handler 
- save all CPU register values  
- execute the interrupt handler
- jump out of interrupt by restoring CPU registers



IO-APIC get used for hardware interrupts.





#### Paging 

- Segments define logical address which get converted into linear address which then turns into Physical address.
- 4KB page frames in x86-64
- CR registers used for page directories.
- TLB shootdown happens when PTE gets updated
- Kernel reservers physical memory for pagetables before hand without depending on virtual memeory address
- Every process has its own page table.





#### Usermode

- `EFLAGS` register on CPU get used to keep a track of user mode or previllage levels.
- What usermode takes
  - eip on the stack point to the entry point for user mode
  - esp on the stack point to stack for the user mode
  - cs on the stack points to user code
  - ss on the stack points to user data
  - RPL - segment selector bits set 
  - `iret. - move to usermode



#### System calls and scheduling 

- implementing system calls 
- context switching
- 



















